---
layout: post
title: Winter Hiking 2014
description: In which I talk about the recent winter hiking trip I went on
slug: winter-hiking-2014
---

Every January, for the last 3 years now, I have gone with a group of people
to a state forest in the Northern Lower Peninsula of Michigan. We usually go
up on a Thursday, and stay until Sunday morning. There are no "official"
camp sites in this state forest, just a couple 3-wall cabins. My
understanding is that, if they added the fourth wall, they could be
classified as "dwellings" and would be susceptible (sp?) to squatters,
as well as other legal ramifications.

Thursday usually starts out with a group of us meeting up somewhere to
start the long journey up north. The drive takes somewhere between 2 and
3 hours. At least, thats what it would take if we drove it straight
through. Instead, we usually make a few stops along the way. Lunch,
last-minute supplies, etc. In the end, it could be a 5- to 6-hour trip.

By the time we actually get to the parking area, it is between 3 and 4 in 
the afternoon. It will be dark by about 5, so we gear up and try to get
on the trail as soon as we can.

The hike in is usually the hardest part of the trip, for me at least.
This year was no exception, and easily beats out my previous two hikes
for difficulty. I didn't really have more weight than usual to
carry/pull, but the weight caused me to get sweaty, which caused me to
take off my hat and gloves, which was a problem when the sun went down
and the temperature dropped below zero. I ended up looking like Frosty
the Snowman. I had grown my beard out for this hike, and with my sweat
and the moisture from my breath freezing onto my face, my beard,
eyebrows, and hair went from red to white.

By the time I got to the halfway point of the hike, some muscles in my
legs were starting to cramp up, making it difficult to finish. Luckily
a couple of my friends stayed back with me and helped me through the
last leg of the trek.

When we all got to the cabin, after an almost 2-hour long hike in, it
was time to gather firewood.  Unfortunately, we didn't have the best
wood-cutting supplies with us.  Those were coming with some more of our
party, who were coming up the next day. We had to make due with a couple
hand saws, and a tomahawk for splitting. We found a few dead trees that
weren't too difficult to fell, and went to work. About 4 hours later, we
had a small pile of wood, and a fire going in the fireplace. It was a
good thing, too, as the temperature that night got down to -30°F.
Needless to say, we were pretty cold that night. We were nervous that
the amount of firewood we had gathered would not be enough, so we kept
the fire at a low burn most of the night, and most, if not all, of us
slept in our gear.

Typically we go on dayhikes while we are on this trip, but after the
night we had, Friday became a lazy, stay-in-the-cabin kind of day. The
rest of our party was due in that evening, so we all just lazed around
the cabin. We ate, we played cards, we talked, and good times were had
by all. When the rest of our party got there, they brought with them the
chain saw and the splitting maul, so we suited up and got to work. The
amount of firewood we cut, blocked, and split that evening was
*obscene*. We stacked wood next to the fireplace until it was going to
start encroaching on our sleeping area, and we had to pile the rest
outside. It was like going from living in a slum, to winning the lottery
and moving in to a mansion. By the time we were done cutting wood, the
cabin was a balmy 80 degrees.

Saturday morning we had one more member of our party coming in, so me
and one other person went back down the trail to the parking area at
8am. This time the hike took us about 50 minutes, though of course we
did not have any gear, and the temperature was in the 20's, so we could
keep up a faster pace. We met up with the last member of our party and
hiked right back out to the cabin. Since we didn't have to worry about
firewood anymore, we could take some time to relax, and eat lunch before
our day hike.

We started our hike by going up to the "upper cabin." We were staying at
the "lower cabin," since it is the bigger of the two. The upper cabin
still has a place in my heart though, since that was the cabin we stayed
in the first year I went on the trip. After visiting the upper cabin, we
went around some snowmobile trails, filled our water bottles in the
river, and eventually ended up on a game trail through the woods, until
we finally made it back to our cabin. We actually got back before dark,
which is a rare thing for our day hike.
