---
layout: post
title: Cargo "do"
description: In which we make a cargo subcommand
slug: cargo-do
---

While digging in to the [Cargo](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo)
source code, I noticed that there is a way to extend cargo by adding
subcommands. I thought I would experiment a bit and see if I could come
up with something interesting to add to `cargo`'s repertoire.

## The `do` subcommand

Before it hit 1.0, I spent some time learning
[Elixir](https://elixir-lang.org) and using it's build tool, `mix`. One
feature of `mix` that I thought was kind of neat was the `do` subcommand.
It looks like this:

```bash
$ mix do deps.get, compile
```

and is basically equivalent to this:

```bash
$ mix deps.get && mix compile
```

Not a huge improvement, keystroke-wise, but I enjoy it nonetheless. It
reminds me of `make` invocations like `make clean build install`.

## Extending `cargo`

The way that you extend the `cargo` tool with new subcommands is pretty
simple. When you invoke a `cargo` subcommand, it looks in a few
different places for the implementation of the subcommand.

First, it has a predefined list of subcommands that come with a clean
install of `cargo`:

```bash
$ cargo --list
Installed Commands:
    bench
    build
    clean
    config-for-key
    config-list
    doc
    fetch
    generate-lockfile
    git-checkout
    help
    locate-project
    login
    new
    owner
    package
    pkgid
    publish
    read-manifest
    run
    test
    update
    verify-project
    version
    yank
```

Next, it looks in the `$PREFIX/lib/cargo` directory, and finally in the
`$PREFIX/bin` directory. When it goes onto the filesystem, what it is looking
for is an executable file with a name of the form `cargo-${subcommand}`.

So, since it is only looking for an executable with a specific name, you don't
actually have to write _any_ Rust code at all, to extend `cargo`. But
where is the fun in that?

## Setting up a project

So, let's set up a new Rust project and write our `cargo-do` subcommand.
First, we will use `cargo` to create a new project:

```bash
$ cd ~/projects
~/projects $ cargo new cargo-do --bin
~/projects $ cd cargo-do
~/projects/cargo-do $
```

This generates everything we need for a Rust project that builds an
executable.

```bash
~/projects/cargo-do $ find .
.
./.gitignore
./.git
# ... contents of .git ...
./Cargo.toml
./src
./src/main.rs
```

We can build & run it by invoking `cargo run`:

```bash
~/projects/cargo-do $ cargo run
     Compiling cargo-do v0.0.1 (file:///home/paul/projects/cargo-do)
     Running `target/cargo-do`
Hello, world!
```

So, before we start writing code, we need to define exactly what it is
we want our subcommand to do. We essentially want to take everything to
the right of the `do ` on the command line, split it at every `,`, and
execute each command, one at a time, exiting if the command exits with a
non-zero code.

Sounds simple enough, let's get coding!

## Writing some code

Ok, let's dig in to the code and start creating our subcommand. If we
open `src/main.rs`, we see a single function, `main`. This is the
entrypoint for our executable. We are going to start development by just
building the executable, and running it directly like this:

```bash
$ ./target/cargo-do clean, build
```

or building and running at once, with `cargo run`, like this:

```bash
$ cargo run -- clean, build
```

We will see that a couple things have to be tweaked once we install it
and run it with `cargo do`, but for now, just doing it this way will be
easier.



